[AUDIO LOGO]
[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY:
Psychedelics today
seems to be more
acceptable, Tom,
than it was back in the '60s.
>>TOM HATSIS: These
are actually medicines
that can help society.
People have very deep
spiritual experiences,
and I know because
I'm one of them.
>>NOORY: What does
LSD do to you?
>>HATSIS: It opens
up the gateways
to other dimensions
and other realities,
and enhances the senses we
don't normally have access to,
like more intuitive abilities.
This is not like getting
drunk and it's not
like doing some
other kind of drug.
These are deep
insights and you're
doing a lot of personal work.
Psychedelics are
not magic bullets.
They show you the path, but
you have to walk that path.
>>NOORY: We've got a special
"Beyond Belief" for you today.
Tom Hatsis is with us,
a psychedelic historian,
an author, and a speaker.
He is also the Co-Director
of Sanctum Psychedelia,
a not-for-profit psychedelics
education organization.
How in the world did you get
involved in all of this, Tom?
>>HATSIS: When I
was 18 years old,
I had my first experience
with mushrooms,
and it was love at first bite.
>>NOORY: Where did
you get the mushrooms?
>>HATSIS: A group of people
in Fort Totten, New York.
>>NOORY: How do you know you're
eating the right mushrooms?
Because some mushrooms are
poisonous, aren't they?
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
Well, the thing with
psilocybin mushrooms
is that you pinch them
and they'll bruise blue,
and that's how you
have a good one.
>>NOORY: Do you cook it?
How do you ingest a
mushroom like that?
>>HATSIS: Oh, I'm just--
I just eat it like a sacrament.
Just straight--
>>NOORY: How many does it
take to start putting you
in a different mode?
>>HATSIS: Well, I
prefer higher doses.
So I like the 4-
or 5-gram range.
>>NOORY: Have you ever
seriously OD'd on this stuff?
>>HATSIS: Not really.
I mean, other than having a
more enlightening experience
if that can be called ODing.
>>NOORY: Psychedelics
today seems
to be more acceptable, Tom,
than it was back in the '60s.
In the '60s, I mean,
you were the devil
if you were on
anything like that.
Today it's a little
more accepted.
Why the change?
>>HATSIS: Well, a lot of people
have been working really hard
over the past 20, 30 years to
show that these are actually
medicines that can help society
instead of scourges on society
as they've been called.
>>NOORY: What is a
psychedelic historian?
>>HATSIS: A
psychedelic historian
is someone who
looks into history
and sees where and when
different people used
psychoactive and
psychedelic plants
and fungi for different
kinds of purposes,
whether they be spiritual,
therapeutic, religious,
mystical, things like that.
>>NOORY: Was Santa a mushroom?
>>HATSIS: No, Santa
Claus was not a mushroom.
>>NOORY: I keep hearing
stories that he was.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, yeah,
I've heard that, too.
Yeah, yeah.
No, it's something
I actually believed
in my youthful
indiscretion days myself.
But as I look deeper into it,
one of the important things
about psychedelic
history is not just
finding where psychedelics
appear in history,
but also finding where they
don't appear in history.
And the whole Santa Claus
Amanita muscaria mushroom,
that's the famous red-top--
>>NOORY: That's right.
>>HATSIS: --white
spotted mushroom.
>>NOORY: --costume.
>>HATSIS: What's that?
Yeah.
But his costume actually went
through a variety of changes
throughout the 1800s, and only
later settled on red and white.
And when you go back
and look at the sources,
if it actually had been
based on the mushroom,
that would have been evident
right from the start,
and it just wasn't.
>>NOORY: Tom, there's a
word, E-R-G-O-T, ergot.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
>>NOORY: What does that mean?
>>HATSIS: Ergot is a fungus that
grows on diseased rye grain.
It kind of sticks out
like a sore thumb.
It looks like this little
purplish black spur.
In fact, the word "ergot"
comes from the French "argot"
which means spur.
And it was the cause of
this horrific malady called
St. Anthony's fire all
throughout history where,
I mean, your limbs
blacken and fall off,
your skin gets all scabby.
>>NOORY: Oh my God.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, it's horrible.
>>NOORY: From this stuff?
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
We actually have reports
from the Middle Ages
of people that were
suffering from ergotism,
which is what it's called.
And they would actually
drown themselves just
to escape the torment.
>>NOORY: Do some
people today still
come down with this affliction?
>>HATSIS: I think
the last time this
happened was in the
early 1950s in France,
but not so much anymore.
We have much better
refining techniques
than the people of
the Middle Ages.
>>NOORY: Where is
this ergot today?
>>HATSIS: I mean, you could find
it anywhere where grain grows.
It's just a fungus that
will grow on grain.
>>NOORY: But it's
that dangerous?
>>HATSIS: Oh yeah,
very dangerous.
You don't want to eat
ergot, absolutely not.
>>NOORY: My God.
And how does it tie into
the Salem Witch Trials?
>>HATSIS: Well,
so interestingly,
just like the whole
Santa Claus and mushroom
idea that's kind
of a modern myth,
another modern myth is the
idea that the Salem witch
trials were based on ergotism.
But I went back and looked
at the primary records from
the Salem witch trials
and it doesn't--
>>NOORY: --doesn't
even come up, does it?
>>HATSIS: No, it doesn't.
And the idea was
that the young girls
who had pretty much started the
whole Salem witch trials were--
it was said that they were
having these hallucinations
and convulsions, and
there was a researcher
in the 1970s named Linda
Corporal who hypothesized,
oh, maybe this was due to ergot.
But the issue is-- why I think
that it wasn't actually based
on ergot was that the
young girls didn't
show any of the outward
signs of ergotism.
They didn't-- their limbs didn't
fall off and they didn't get
scabs or anything.
And they only seem
to have convulsions
when they were in the same
room with the accused,
like in the court house.
That's mighty
specific for ergot.
We don't really know of any
kind of malady that acts up
just because someone
else is in a room,
and as soon as they're
led out of the room,
the convulsions stopped?
I think that we can pin the
origin of the Salem Witch
Trials not to ergotism,
but to the imaginations
of a group of young girls.
>>NOORY: Tom, I want to
talk with you about LSD
and psychedelics, but first
let's look at Paul Austin,
an expert on
psychedelics, appearing
on Gaia's "Healing Matrix."
>>PAUL AUSTIN: And
then when we look
at the second wave
of psychedelics,
this was when psychedelics
were first reintroduced
into modern Western culture.
And it started when Albert
Hofmann invented LSD in 1938,
and then really picked up
steam in the '50s and '60s
with Timothy Leary
and Richard Alpert
and the entire counterculture.
And the hallmark of the '60s
as we know it culturally
was irresponsible use.
In other words it was, well
everyone should just take LSD
and we'll see how
that can transform.
And the big difference
between the second wave
and the third wave
is the third wave
is about responsible intentional
use for specific outcome.
And this has really
been kickstarted
by the legalization
of cannabis where
we're starting to
reevaluate what we thought
was a dangerous substance,
an illicit substance, and now
we're realizing, oh,
it has medical value,
and we can legalize it.
And then that was followed by
all of this research that's
starting to come out about
the efficacy of psychedelics
to treat a number of
intractable clinical conditions
like PTSD, treatment-resistant
depression, and alcoholism.
And so with those two forces
coming together, that--
plus this trend of
microdosing, it's
clear that our culture now
is more ready than it's ever
been to finally have a
mature conversation about,
how can we actually
use these substances
appropriately for development,
growth, and transformation?
>>NOORY: Tom, what
exactly is LSD?
>>HATSIS: LSD is a refined
version of ergot which
we've been talking about
where the more awful parts
of ergotism are totally
suppressed and the--
>>NOORY: Let's hope so.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
And the more, at
least in my opinion,
the more spiritually significant
parts of it are amplified.
>>NOORY: Can they make a
mistake and get too much ergot
in the LSD?
>>HATSIS: Well,
I'm not a chemist,
so I would probably
make that mistake,
but other people that
know what they're doing
are really good at making
sure that when you take LSD,
your limbs don't fall off.
>>NOORY: Kids, don't
do this at home, right?
>>HATSIS: Yeah, do it in a park.
>>NOORY: Back again,
back in the '60s,
LSD was used a lot
by the younger crowd,
but looked at as something evil.
Today it's a little more
acceptable, isn't it?
Why is that?
>>HATSIS: Sure.
Well again, there's
better research
coming out as Paul said.
But interestingly,
before the '60s,
the 1950s was also filled
with responsible use.
So there is a lot of that that
happened before the 1960s.
Before LSD broke out
into the streets,
it was actually
very well-respected,
and many doctors believed,
as many of us do today,
that this was a very
useful key into the mind
and into the soul.
>>NOORY: Who is Albert Hofmann?
>>HATSIS: Albert Hofmann
was the Swiss chemist who
synthesized LSD, as
Paul mentioned, in 1938.
>>NOORY: Aha.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
He was working--
>>NOORY: He was number one.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, he
was the first one.
Actually, the date is coming up.
April 16, 1938 was
when the first--
he accidentally ingested--
somehow, we don't know.
He ingested a little
bit of LSD and ended up
leaving his laboratory
for the day.
And then-- this was on a--
>>NOORY: Physically or mentally?
>>HATSIS: Mostly physically
and a little mentally.
He said he just
felt a little dizzy.
And then two days later
on Monday, April 19,
he took the first
deliberate dose of LSD.
>>NOORY: Wasn't there a story
about the CIA giving somebody
LSD and the guy jumped out
the window or something?
>>HATSIS: Yeah,
jumped or pushed.
His name was--
>>NOORY: Or pushed.
>>HATSIS: His name
was Frank Olson,
and he was part of an
experiment within this larger
umbrella known as
MKUltra where LSD
was given sometimes
wittingly, sometimes
unwittingly to people.
And he seems to have
had a bad reaction.
I mean, reports are
kind of a little fuzzy
because his wife said that
he had actually spoken her
on the phone and said
that he was fine,
and when he fell
from that window,
it was actually the
Statler Hotel in New York,
we don't know if he jumped
or if he was pushed.
But there really aren't
too many cases of people
jumping out of windows a
week or so after taking LSD.
I mean, this wasn't--
>>NOORY: --good point.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
This was way after the fact.
And it-- personally I think he
was pushed, but that's just me.
>>NOORY: Are psychedelics
used as medicinals?
>>HATSIS: Oh,
absolutely they are.
I mean, I use them
personally as medicinals.
And not just for--
>>NOORY: What do
they do for you?
>>HATSIS: Well for me,
they put me in communion
with my goddess, personally.
I'm a goddess worshipper.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
I--
>>NOORY: Your god is a goddess?
>>HATSIS: My god
is a goddess, yes.
The creator of the universe.
And for me, they put me
in a communion with her.
And yeah, I think
that they've been
misunderstood throughout--
mostly because of the '60s.
And again, I agree with my
friend and colleague Paul
about that.
They don't drive people crazy.
With the right set
and setting, I mean,
people have very deep
spiritual experiences,
and I know because
I'm one of them.
>>NOORY: How do you
know how much to ingest?
>>HATSIS: Well for
me, I'll start off
with about 3 or 4 grams, and
then when I'm in that space,
sometimes my goddess will tell
me to take more, especially
with mushrooms.
And so I'll take more after that
and she'll tell me when to stop
and when not to in order
to get to that place
that I need to get to.
>>NOORY: Are these considered
illegal substances still?
>>HATSIS: Well, so in
Portland where I live,
we just legalized psilocybin
mushrooms for therapeutic use
and we decriminalized
all substances.
And-- I mean, this might
sound weird or arrogant,
but I don't care about
the legal substance.
These are-- we have a human
right to these medicines,
so I don't care what
any law says about them.
>>NOORY: You would not put
cocaine in this category?
>>HATSIS: No I wouldn't.
Not at all.
Cocaine is a different--
I mean, the FDA might,
but I certainly don't.
>>NOORY: And what about the
dangers of fentanyl these days?
>>HATSIS: Oh, that's awful.
Yeah, people putting
fentanyl in things like MDMA,
that's just horrible.
So you always want to
make sure that you're
testing your substances
before taking them.
Yeah, people go to
Dance Safe and they'll
send you a test kits.
And always make sure to test
your stuff before ingesting it.
I mean, people don't put
fentanyl and mushrooms, really,
so you don't got to
worry about that.
>>NOORY: Can you
die from mushrooms?
>>HATSIS: No.
>>NOORY: Can you die from LSD?
>>NOORY: But you can
die from fentanyl?
>>HATSIS: Oh, absolutely.
>>NOORY: OK, there's
a big difference.
What does LSD do to you?
To the mind?
>>HATSIS: It opens
up the portals,
it opens up the gateways
to other dimensions
and other realities.
I mean, at least that's
what it does for me
and pretty much all the witchy
people that I hang out with,
all the tree-huggers.
For us, it puts us in communion
with nature and the gods.
>>NOORY: Are you
alert of things?
>>HATSIS: Oh, absolutely.
>>NOORY: You can function?
>>HATSIS: Yeah--
well, it depends, I
mean, on how big the dose is.
>>NOORY: Would you drive a car?
>>HATSIS: Oh, absolutely not.
>>NOORY: You would not?
>>HATSIS: No, no, no.
When I'm-- I mean,
when I do my--
when I eat my
psychedelics, I do it
in a highly
ritualized container.
I mean, there's incense
and chanting and prayers.
It's a lot of fun.
>>NOORY: Does it
enhance your senses?
>>HATSIS: In an odd way, yes.
I would say that it enhances
the senses we don't normally
have access to, like
more intuitive abilities.
And a lot of people sometimes,
either with mushrooms or LSD,
will have these
psychic moments where
they're like reading
each other's thoughts.
That happens quite frequently
>>NOORY: Between people?
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
And they actually tested
that in the 1950s.
There was a woman named
Rosalind Haywood who was a--
she was a medium, and she would
test both mescaline, which
is the synthetic version
of the sacred peyote
cactus, along with LSD.
And she said that the
psychic state of awareness
and the psychedelic
state of awareness
were one and the same.
>>NOORY: Can you overdose
on the psychedelics?
>>HATSIS: I've
never heard of that.
I don't think you can.
And, I mean, mushrooms are
one of the safest things
you can put in your body.
I mean, you certainly can't
overdose on mushrooms.
>>NOORY: So they can't kill you?
>>HATSIS: No.
Unless you do something
very irresponsible.
>>NOORY: Like jump out a window.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Or be pushed.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, or drive
a car or go swimming
or just-- it's better to
have a safe container.
>>NOORY: Well, do you lose
control of your faculties?
And by that, I mean,
do you say, I'm
going to go shopping
now in the car?
Or do you know, are you
aware, I'm not going to drive?
>>HATSIS: I mean, I can't speak
for how other people do it.
I personally think it's a very
bad idea to go driving a car
or go shopping or do
anything other than stay
within a safe container.
>>NOORY: But under the
influence, you know this?
>>HATSIS: Oh, of course.
>>NOORY: That you can't do this?
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
I mean, this doesn't--
LSD and mushrooms, they're
not like alcohol or anything
like that or cocaine where
you get this, as they call it,
like a liquid
confidence with alcohol.
You're pretty well aware.
And I mean, LSD doesn't destroy
the mind the way it was once
said it did.
There's a lot of information
still floating around
out there about what
these medicines can do.
>>NOORY: Gaia's got
a program called
Psychedelica discussing the
shadow side of psychedelics.
Let's get your
reaction after this.
>>BRIGTTE MARS:
There's a concern
that a lot of young people
are taking these substances
and maybe having a difficult
or dangerous experience.
And personally, I
think that when you're
doing these substances at
a concert with thousands
of people and very loud music
that may not have the highest
intentions, it might
be music that's
coming from a place of ego
and only junk food and alcohol
being served, I see
that as something that's
going to not give you a
deep personal experience.
>>SHANE MAUSS: For me, I try
to avoid festivals and concerts
in general when I'm
on psychedelics.
I don't think that I get a
lot of deep inner work done
when there's music blaring and
a light show and all of that.
It can be fun.
I don't-- it's not
that I never do it,
but it can be a little
overwhelming for a lot
of people, I think.
Or just not productive.
>>STANISLAV GROF: And
you have to choose
if you want to use the full
potential of psychedelics
or if you want to play
psychedelic roulette.
People have taken it under a
lot of lousy circumstances,
of course.
There are the raves
where people go get it,
they don't know what they are
taking how much they're taking.
They know they're doing
something illegal or the police
can come-- this is the loudest--
loudest possible
setting I can imagine.
>>NOORY: What do
you think of that?
>>HATSIS: So part of me
agrees because that's
what worked for me, is again, I
like to have a safe container.
But there's also a certain type
of mystical experience known
as a monastic mystical
experience, which is exactly
that, where you are
surrounded by a lot of people
and there is a lot of
music, and you lose yourself
in that sort of environment and
the ego completely dissolves.
So again, that's not the way I
prefer to use these medicines,
but I wouldn't say that for
everybody that's the worst way.
In my 20s, some friends and I,
we would go up to Lake George
and we would make
this big bonfire
and eat mushrooms and get
out the drums and guitars
and dance around the bonfires.
And, I mean, it
was a lot of fun.
So I don't recommend
anybody do that,
but it depends on
the person, really.
I don't do it that way anymore.
I would agree with a lot
of the commentary there.
>>NOORY: OK, interesting.
How often do you do it, Tom?
>>HATSIS: Mushrooms, that's the
one that I do the most often.
At least once a year,
but a few times.
>>NOORY: Once a
year's not a lot.
>>HATSIS: No, it's not.
But there's integration
that has to follow.
Again, this is not
like getting drunk
and it's not like doing
some other kind of drug.
These are deep
insights and you're
doing a lot of
personal work, so you
want to have a period
of integration.
I mean, psychedelics
are not magic bullets.
They show you the path, but
you have to walk that path.
>>NOORY: Does LSD
give you the ability
to have extrasensory perception?
>>HATSIS: Some people
would say that it does,
and I'm certainly
open-minded to it.
I think that, again
in the 1950s--
and a little in
the 1960s, they did
test for that, and
unfortunately, the hammer
came down, and people--
all of a sudden,
people weren't allowed
to work with these
medicines anymore.
And I've had more than
enough experiences
with these medicines to say
that the case is definitely
not closed on that.
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, it really is.
I mean, you're tapping
into parts of your mind
that you don't ordinarily
have access to.
And, I mean, the mind
is a deep reservoir
of just fantastic
cosmic awareness.
>>NOORY: People at home
are watching this program
and they're on the fence.
They're saying, I don't
know about LSD or mushrooms.
What do you tell them?
>>HATSIS: If you're on the
fence, don't take them.
Because you want
to be in a place
where you trust the
medicine-- as people
in my kinds of circles
say, to trust the medicine.
When I take LSD or
mushrooms, I trust,
I know, especially
with mushrooms,
that these are gifts
from my goddess.
So I've never had
a bad-- like, I
don't know what a bad trip is.
I mean, I know what a bad
trip is, I've heard of them,
but for me, I mean, that's
I've never experienced that.
>>NOORY: Do you have a bona fide
good supplier for mushrooms?
>>HATSIS: Oh, absolutely.
>>NOORY: Could you
get a bad supplier?
>>HATSIS: Well, I
pick them myself
from the Oregon Coast
with my partner.
>>NOORY: Well, you
know what you're doing?
>>HATSIS: Yeah, I
know what I'm doing.
So I've grown them as
well, so I get them myself.
I learned-- I started doing this
because people would put them
in plastic bags to sell them,
which is like, ew, you're
suffocating them.
So I was like, I want
to go get them myself.
So my partner and I,
we go to the coast,
we do all kinds
of witchy things,
we say prayer to the Earth,
we clean up the woods.
So if there's litter
anywhere, we clean it up.
And then Gaia bestows
her gifts upon us.
>>NOORY: With the
use of psychedelics,
what can you do with it?
What do you use it as a tool?
>>HATSIS: For me, for
spiritual growth and just
a better understanding of
our place in the world.
My own place, my community's
place, my friend's place,
and all of us and how we
can work better together
with each other.
And just to-- life is kind of
difficult, and it can really--
it can knock you down.
And for me, just having
that space, a church
within your own body, a temple
within your own mind and soul,
and being able to go
there, it just, for me,
growing up in New York,
it certainly tempers me
and makes me--
>>NOORY: It calms you down?
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
And I think that that's
what a lot of people
turn to these medicines
for, just answers, really.
I think a lot of us are looking
for answers, especially as we
get further and further
away from the natural world
with technology and social
media that is ruining all of us
as people, having these kinds
of medicines and having that,
as Terence McKenna would put it,
that archaic revival especially
within yourself,
being able to touch
our ancestors through
these medicines I
think is so important.
>>NOORY: Why do you call
the psychedelics medicines?
>>HATSIS: Because they are.
They've always been medicines.
They've always been
spiritual tools.
And we're trying to change that
paradigm that, again, grew out
of the late 1960s where
they were seen, again,
as the scourge of society.
And because you had a
lot of people using them
irresponsibly, they were taken
out of the safe containers
and put into-- yeah,
going to rock festivals.
Again, for some people--
>>NOORY: What's wrong
with that, though?
>>HATSIS: Well for some people,
they're not ready for that.
They'll think that it's
like, oh, well, you know,
I've gotten really drunk before.
I've taken half a bottle
of whiskey to the dome
and I was fine.
And I could go-- yeah, well,
mushrooms are way different.
I mean, you're opening
yourself up to portals
beyond your normal
consciousness.
I mean, do you really
want this loud amplifier
blasting bass music in your
face when that's happening?
>>NOORY: So it doesn't
enhance the music?
>>HATSIS: Well it
can, of course,
if you're spiritually
prepared for it
and you're mentally
prepared for it.
Yeah, I mean, I like--
again, I would eat mushrooms
and we'd have drums and
flutes and guitars and things.
We'd throw love
parties in my house
where it's these very
decadent affairs with MDMA
and mushrooms and fruit plates
and things and throw pillows.
>>NOORY: It doesn't
papitate the heart
or give you a racy heartbeat
or anything like that?
>>HATSIS: No, no.
Not if you're in that safe
container, it doesn't.
If you're dancing, of course,
at a concert it's going to--
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>HATSIS: It'll
have that effect--
>>NOORY: The
adrenaline is rushing--
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
Your adrenaline is going, and of
course, it can cause confusion,
and especially if you're not
prepared for what might happen.
And also, it's not
always the best way
to respect these mushrooms.
I mean, they'll tell you where
they want the experience to go,
and if the mushrooms don't want
you to be at that rock concert,
they're going to let you know.
>>NOORY: How many people
have a misconception
about the psychedelics?
>>HATSIS: Oh, that I don't know.
Nobody I hang out
with, but a lot of--
>>NOORY: I bet most people do.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, a
lot of people do.
But as Paul had said before,
I mean, that is changing.
People are seeing more
and more that these
are so beneficial for
the mind, body, and soul.
>>NOORY: What is
Operation Midnight Climax?
>>HATSIS: Wow, talk
about abusing LSD.
Operation Midnight Climax was
a subproject within the larger
MKUltra umbrella--
>>NOORY: Part of
the CIA umbrella?
>>HATSIS: Yeah, part
of the CIA umbrella.
It was run by a guy named
George Hunter White who
rented apartments in both
New York and San Francisco,
and he would
unwittingly drug people.
He would bring them back
to these apartments,
slip them LSD, and then watch
from behind a double-glass
with a camera and he'd
be drinking whiskey
and he would watch them
have sex with sex workers.
And he would drug
the sex workers, too.
I mean, it was awful.
An absolute abuse
of these medicines.
And of course, because
the setting was so foul,
the experiences were not good.
>>NOORY: Mentalist
Uri Geller talks
about many classified
CIA experiments
that he was part of.
>>URI GELLER: Some missions--
or most missions I
can't even talk about,
because this wasn't--
CIA wasn't the only
secret intelligence.
There was MI5, MI6,
the list goes on.
Now believe it or
not, they wanted
to see if my mind can
trigger a nuclear weapon.
So they took me to the Lawrence
Livermore Radiation Labs
where they build atomic bombs.
I can't even start describing
to you what happened in there.
This falls into
the category of--
think about the most
incredible science fiction film
that you've ever seen.
That's what's happened in that
secret installation of Lawrence
Livermore Radiation Lab.
That scientists
began to hallucinate.
They saw birds flying.
People with no arms.
Washington was so concerned,
CIA were so concerned
about those scientists at the
Lawrence Livermore Radiation
Labs that they flew people out.
The things that were going
on at the Lawrence Livermore
Radiation Labs when I tried
to trigger a nuclear bomb
were amazing.
>>NOORY: I know Uri
really well, and you
could tell that he was concerned
about that experiment he
was part of.
>>HATSIS: Sure, yeah.
I mean, to be honest,
I'd never heard
of that aspect of LSD history.
I did not know that
they were trying to use
psychics to set off a bomb.
>>NOORY: Why would they do that?
>>HATSIS: They did a lot of
really nasty stuff testing--
>>NOORY: And strange things.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, really,
really strange, and again,
really awful things.
And trying to get a medium
to set off a nuclear missile,
I mean, if anything,
you should be
trying to get mediums to
disarm nuclear missiles.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
What are your thoughts
on Frank Olson?
>>HATSIS: Well,
Frank Olson, I mean,
it's a really sad case
what happened to him.
I think that he was actually
murdered by the CIA.
He wasn't even the first--
>>NOORY: Why would
they want to do him in?
>>HATSIS: Because this
was all top secret,
and they feared a stool pigeon.
And he wasn't even
the first person
to actually die under
these experiments.
So they were just
trying to keep it--
>>NOORY: They thought
he'd go public?
>>HATSIS: Yeah, they
feared that he might.
>>NOORY: So out
the window he goes.
>>HATSIS: So out
>>NOORY: Wow.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
>>NOORY: How old was he?
>>HATSIS: Oh, I'm not 100% sure.
I think he was in his early to
mid-30s if I'm not mistaken.
>>NOORY: Just a young guy.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, he
was a young guy.
>>NOORY: What's the
War Without Death?
>>HATSIS: So the
War Without Death
was largely the idea of a
named Major General William
Creasy who thought
that we could--
instead of like sending
troops into urban areas
and having a firefight, what if
we could just somehow deliver
LSD to troubled areas and
then round up insurgents?
He wanted to actually
test this by bombing
an American subway,
which they didn't do.
They said, well--
>>NOORY: False flags.
>>HATSIS: Yeah,
exactly, it would
be like a false flag thing.
>>NOORY: Geez.
>>HATSIS: They didn't end up
doing that, but in theory,
it's really not a bad
idea, I mean, not--
to get rid of the death
and horrible parts of war.
Like if you could just put
people in an LSD trance
instead.
But this, of course,
has its problems.
I mean, some people will become
violently even more aggressive.
And also, they
learned, actually,
during the Midnight
Climax tests,
that you cannot
detonate LSD in the air.
Like you couldn't have it as
an aerosol spray or anything
like that.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>HATSIS: And also--
>>NOORY: It doesn't
work, it's not effective.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, it's
not effective at all.
So then they said, well, what if
we put it in the water supply?
It's like, OK,
sure, but how do you
ensure that only insurgents
are drinking that water?
Everybody's going
to be drinking it.
And do you really want an
entire area, especially
in area under control of
insurgents with everybody
tripping on LSD?
Probably not the best idea.
>>NOORY: What has been the most
bizarre aspect of all of this
that you've gone through?
Do get emotional?
Do you cry?
>>HATSIS: Oh, many
times I've cried.
But they're tears of joy,
they're tears of ecstasy.
I mean, they're
tears of like just--
>>NOORY: Not sadness.
>>HATSIS: No.
Tears of just bliss and just
being in that divine place,
like it's that kind of tear.
Like someone is at a
wedding, people are crying,
but they're not sad,
it's tears of joy.
>>NOORY: So you'll
continue doing this?
>>HATSIS: Oh, absolutely.
Yeah, these are a deep and
meaningful part of my life.
And again, it's part of
my own spiritual practice,
so it would be like asking a
Catholic to give up communion,
because--
>>NOORY: We've got some
other names for you.
Maria Huxley.
>>HATSIS: Oh, Maria Huxley, yes.
>>NOORY: Tell us about that.
>>HATSIS: One of the unsung
heroes of the Psychedelic
Renaissance was Maria
Huxley, the wife
of the great literary
gent, Aldous Huxley.
>>NOORY: Oh yeah.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
What makes her so important
is that when you actually
read the "Doors of Perception,"
which is arguably the most
famous essay ever written on
the psychedelic experience
by Aldous Huxley, he was talking
and thinking in clinical terms,
and he was talking to
Humphry Osmond, who
was the Canadian psychiatrist
who gave him the mescaline.
And when you read
the essay, you find
that all of these spiritual
ideas came from Maria.
So Aldous and
Humphry are talking
about boring clinical staff,
and Maria's like, oh my God,
enough with this crap.
She's like, there's something
so much deeper going on.
So she says to Aldous,
focus your mind
on the clear light of
the Tibetan Buddhists.
And when you read the
medical literature
that came later on
in the later 1950s,
they are all citing Huxley--
Aldous Huxley's "The
Doors of Perception."
>>NOORY: Right.
>>HATSIS: But the spiritual
idea, that paradigm, that
came right from Maria.
>>NOORY: Now who's Maria Sabina?
>>HATSIS: Maria Sabina.
Ah, the two Marias
of the 1950s, yes.
Maria Sabina was a curandera,
which means medicine woman,
living in Huautla de Jimnez--
>>NOORY: Like a shaman?
>>HATSIS: Yeah,
like a shaman, yes.
Living in Huautla de Jimnez,
which is a small village
in Oaxaca.
And she gave mushrooms to two
Americans, one Valentina Wasson
and her husband
Robert Gordon Wasson,
and they became the
first two Americans
to take part in this
kind of sacred ceremony.
>>NOORY: I see.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
And they ended up writing very
popular articles and books
about their encounter--
>>NOORY: Endorsing this?
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
And really showing
like hey, there's not
just a medical paradigm, which
was all the rage in the 1950s,
there is a spiritual
paradigm to this
that maybe we need to
take a deeper look at.
>>NOORY: Does your personality,
Tom, change at all?
>>HATSIS: No.
I mean you change
over time by doing
the work through the
insights that you get,
but it's not like you're
going to eat mushrooms or LSD
or like take 5-MeO-DMT
or ayahuasca,
and then you're going to
come back like, wow, I'm
cured of everything!
That's not going to happen.
It's the work that
is done over time.
It's kind of-- in a sense that
seeing a doctor or something.
They say, oh, like-- think
of it like physical therapy.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>HATSIS: Right?
You have an injury.
You go see a physical
therapist and they'd
say, oh, work your leg this
way, work your elbow this way.
But it's up to you to continue
to work you're like this way
and work your arm this way and
do the exercises for months
after so that you're
healing yourself.
>>NOORY: What does the church
say about psychedelics?
>>HATSIS: So interestingly,
during the 1950s,
the church was absolutely
in favor of using LSD.
And we know guys like Father
JE Brown who would actually
bless people before their LSD--
>>NOORY: Really?
>>HATSIS: Oh yeah.
He actually sent out a mailer.
He's up in Vancouver, Canada--
well not anymore, he's
passed on since then.
But when he was up
in Vancouver, Canada,
he sent out a mailer to
his whole congregation
saying LSD is a gift that
puts us in touch with God
and we need to embrace this.
And you had, I mean, priests.
There was also Ed
Dowling was another one.
Another guy named
Father Murray who worked
with Claire and Henry Luce.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
And he would bless their LSD
voyages and sit with them
and give them spiritual advice.
So there's really--
in the 1950s,
Catholicism and LSD
went hand-in-hand.
Now that's a little
different today
because LSD is
considered a "drug,"
and there's a
certain teetotalling
mindset, which is fine,
other than giving you wine
every Sunday.
But again, that's changing.
In fact, I happen to
have it on good authority
that Harvard is
thinking about starting
some kind of
theological curriculum
for these medicines-- and I
can't say too much about that
now because I'm not the person
working directly with it.
A friend and
colleague of mine is,
and I'll let him tell
that story when it breaks.
>>NOORY: And when you
say medicines, Tom,
what does it do to
help you medically?
>>HATSIS: So especially
mushrooms in your mind,
it helps with what's
known as remyelization.
In our brains, we have
what's called myelin,
and that breaks down over
time, and actually is
what causes senility and
Alzheimer's in the elderly.
>>NOORY: --dementia?
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
Psilocybin mushrooms actually
fix the myelin in your brain.
>>NOORY: I would think that.
>>HATSIS: Yeah, they do.
So they really-- I mean,
it's like we have the science
to back this up.
It's not just, oh,
that crazy Tom Hatsis,
you know he's a weird, witchy
guy who likes mushrooms.
No.
The guys in the laboratories
are saying this.
>>NOORY: How important
have psychedelics
been to the human psyche?
>>HATSIS: I think
very important,
going all the way back to
the days of ancient Egypt,
Greece, the Sumerian
civilization.
They have really helped
people for thousands of years
all over the world
in a variety of ways.
>>NOORY: Ben Stewart on "Gaia
News" talks about psychedelics
and how they may
have influenced who
we are as human beings today
>>BEN STEWART: There's a
possibility that the Stoned Ape
theory could lead into this.
Now the Stoned Ape
theory was really
popularized by Terence McKenna.
Over time, you would have some
of our ancient ancestors--
hominids-- that
would be following
around bovine creatures-- cows.
And in the cow
patties, in the fields,
they would naturally, having
followed these creatures
around for hundreds of
thousands of years, whatever
it might have been, that
they would have started
eating the mushrooms, the
psilocybin mushrooms that
grow naturally in cow patties.
These experiences tickling the
language centers of the brain
and other parts of the
brain bringing down
the rigidity of the
default mode network
and activating other
communication hubs
within the brain,
that could actually
explain for the rapid explosion
of the human neocortex.
In this article,
they're saying that
these human-accelerated regions
act differently in humans
than they do in primates or
creatures like mice and ferrets
that they've looked into now.
So potentially if there is some
connection with the Stoned Ape
theory, that psychedelics
or psychotropics
helped in the expansion
of the human neocortex
and made us as at least
psychologically so much
different than all the rest
of the creatures on Earth,
then there may be
something to look at here.
>>NOORY: Tom, how widespread are
psychedelics being used today?
>>HATSIS: All over the world.
I mean, everywhere they're being
used, except for places where
they're not available,
but they are being used
by people everywhere, really.
>>NOORY: Are they
outlawed in every country?
>>HATSIS: No.
Portugal has
decriminalized them,
and so have a lot
of other places.
And again, we're starting
to do that around here.
>>NOORY: In the United States?
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
As far as the Stoned
Ape theory is concerned,
I'm not a neurologist and
neither was Terence McKenna,
and there are actually
much better explanations
for how our brains developed
than through psychedelics.
I would say that if you were
to take the Stoned Ape theory
and move it a few hundred
thousand years into the future
with civilization
and art and music,
that's where you can start
to see the influence.
>>NOORY: Tell us about
this Los Angeles Secret
Society that used LSD.
What was that all about?
>>HATSIS: So during the 1950s,
before the Haight-Ashbury
scene, before the '60s, and--
>>NOORY: Before Tim
Leary and all that.
>>HATSIS: Yeah,
before all of that,
Aldous Huxley and a doctor named
Oscar Janiger would host these
LSD parties where they would--
Alan Watts would be
a frequent member.
So would actually--
Clark Gable--
>>NOORY: Really?
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
The King of Hollywood would
show up to these LSD parties
where they would try to
reenact the Rites of Eleusis.
And they just tap into the
mystical nature of LSD.
>>NOORY: Huh.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
>>NOORY: And these
societies still exist?
>>HATSIS: Oh yeah.
I mean, I'm part of one of them.
>>NOORY: Are you?
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
>>NOORY: How often
do you go to those?
>>HATSIS: Well, I host them
myself about twice a year.
>>NOORY: Oh, then we're not
talking about a lot of presence
here.
>>HATSIS: No, of course.
Because you want--
you always want
to make sure to integrate the
experiences to get the most out
of them.
Again, it's not like alcohol,
it's not even like cannabis,
although you can have deeply
psychedelic experiences
with cannabis.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>HATSIS: But this
is the kind of thing
you really want to take
the time to integrate.
>>NOORY: A kid comes up
to his parents and says,
mom, I want to try
these mushrooms.
What do you tell the kid?
>>HATSIS: Well,
how old is the kid?
>>NOORY: 15, let's say.
Too young?
>>HATSIS: It's weird,
because in some societies,
it could be used as
a rite of passage.
I think it all has to do
with the context of society
and how the society
view these things.
So-- and let's say 50
years when, Gaia willing,
these substances
are parts of a--
>>NOORY: Society.
>>HATSIS: Yeah.
Then it's really not
all that damaging.
As long as it's just that
one time within that larger
safe container and within--
I should say within the larger
society that's accepting it,
and that there's a path to work
with this, it's not just a kid
taking mushrooms.
>>NOORY: But you prefer
the kid doesn't take it?
>>HATSIS: Yeah, right now
I think that it's best.
And it also depends
on the kid as well.
There's a lot-- you always want
to make sure that the person is
in the right state of mind
and they're not just doing it
because, oh, this
is this fun thing
that my friends are doing.
You want to have intention when
you're using these medicines.
>>NOORY: Tom, how
do people track you?
>>HATSIS: Well, if you
go to either YouTube,
just Psychedelic
Historian; Instagram,
Psychedelic Historian; Facebook,
Psychedelic Historian--
if you type Psychedelic
Historian into Google,
I'm what will come up.
>>NOORY: Well thank
you for what you do.
>>HATSIS: Well, thank
you for having me.
>>NOORY: I've actually learned
more about psychedelics
in this program than I
have in my entire life.
And it's very beneficial.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[MUSIC PLAYING]